OK, let's talk about OPRFs, how they are used, how you use them, maybe without
recognizing you do, and how you could use them in your MPC application. This is
joint work with Daniel E, Daniel K, Christian, Verena and Roman, all of which
are at TACEO. 

So maybe let's start with use-cases for OPRFs. Have you ever wanted to send a hash over a
wire, for example to hide a password? 
Or maybe you wanted to throw a party with a friend, but you agreed to only
invite people both of you like, and want to privately solve this by intesecting
the set of people each of you wants to invite? 
Or maybe you want to hand out a number of tokens that can be redeemed later? 
Or, the other way around, maybe you want to generate deterministic identifiers
from biometric data or a password? 
More generally, maybe you have a low-entropy input and get a high-entropy output
 bound to the application from it. 

So the good news is that if you ever had one of the use-cases, you may want to
consider an OPRF!
In an OPRF, a client has an input x and wants to get the PRF evaluation under
the server's key k of x. The oblivious part of this two-party protocol is that
the client learns nothing of the key besides the PRF evaluation of the key, and
the server learns nothing about the input and the output. 

But wait, let's quickly revisit PRFs. I previously said we can use them
in-place when you want to send a hash over a wire. This is not entirely true,
PRFs are defined a lot looser. We only require them to be a deterministic and
polynomial-time function, that produces an output that is indistinguishable from
a randomly chosen element in the output space without knowing the input and the
key. 
A simple way to build them is with elliptic curves; we hash the input to the
curve, evaluate it with our secret key and output a hash of the result to remove
the algebraic structure. 

This construction is really easy to evaluate obliviously: We hash to the group
and blind the element. This is perfectly hiding, so we send it to the server who
evaluates it with the key, sends it back, and we unblind it by applying a group
action with the inverse group element. 

And there are many other ways to do this: you can use Naor-Reingold OPRFs, cool
post-quantum constructions, schemes that shift some computational load to a
data-independent preprocessing phase... but for the purpose of this talk, this
is irrelevant. To the best of our knowledge, only this 2HashDH OPRF is deployed,
so that is all we need ot know. 

The reason for this is that is very simple. And while OPRFs have been presented
at NISTs Multi-party threshold scheme workshop, only the IETF has completed an
RFC for OPRFs. It also standardizes two augmentations: A verifiable OPRF that
adds a DLOG equivalence proof that the correct key was used in the evaluation,
and a partially verifiable OPRF where a part of the input, the tag t, is public.
This can be used to bind additional information to the PRF like a validity
period or some key information. 

You may think this sounds a lot like a blind signature, and a while ago I would
have agreed: they are used interchangably- RFCs using OPRFs specifies both as valid- but
OPRFs are a lot more efficient, and we actually build them quite differentlly as
well, so it makes sense to only focus on OPRFs. However, OPRFs are roughly
between three and ten times more efficent than blind signatures. We can also
amoritze the issuance step for OPRFs, so they get even cheaper.
work with the proofs. 

We identified a number of protocols that use OPRFs. We cluster them in the
following categories: Unlinkability, mostly from PrivacyPass Tokens, protecting
low-entropy secrets, TODO


So let's look at the first use-case: removing the linkability between an request
and a previous authentication. For example, in rate limiting, we want to reward
the user for solving a CAPTCHA by giving them a set of tokens they can redeem
later to bypass CAPTCHA challenges. PrivacyPass, which is standardized by the
IETF, specifices exactly that. According to public statements, this reduces the
number of CAPCHAs by a factor of 30 for companies like cloudflare, leading to a
smoother user experience. It is also used for Media over QUIC, which would lead
to a nicer streaming experience. Finally, there is Kagi, a search engine where users
pay for token access- and in the background, there is also privacypass running
with OPRFs. 

Let's move on to the next use-case: deterministic high-entropy output from
low-entropy secrets. I really like the example of inviting people to a party you
throw together, but assuming everyone has a roughly the same number of friends a
generic circuit does perform better. However, when the sets are mcuch larger for
one party than the other, the party with the larger set, typically the server,
can just publish PRF evaluations of their set, since they are pseudorandom. The
client can then compute an OPRF with all of their set entries and compare
against the published PRF evaluations. 
If the output is revealed later, the server could potentially use a different
key in the PRF session to link the session to the revealed output, which could,
for example, link a set size to an output TODO make nicer 

We found a number of applications using OPRFs for unbalanced set intersections.
Probably the most famous one is Google linking ad views to Visa purchasing
history to gauge ad conversion. Both Google and Microsoft use PSI ot detect
whether passwords appeared in breaches. Cloudflare goes a step further and
compares passwords to detect whether the credential or related credentials
appear in a breach in their Might I Get Pwned protocol. None of the schemes use
verifiability, but in the case of passwords, if a scheme appears later and the
identity is known, the server could pinpoint a session to a leaked credential
TODO. 

Staying with passwords, OPRFs are used in OPAQUE and related protocols to ensure
the keys do not leave the device. To authenticate with a password without
revealing it, the client first registers with a password and uses the OPRF
output to encrypt the secret part of a private/public keypair. On
authentication, the client performs another OPRF with the server and uses the
OPRF output to decrypt the secret key and perform an authenticated key exchange.
This is specified in RFC 9807 and deployed in Whatsapp to avoid revealing the
backup pin. 

Finally, OPRFs are used to deterministically generate identities from
information like social media handles or iris information. This often happens in
a threshold setting. The protocols can be divided into two subprotocols:
Callisto, which detects serial perpetrators of sexual misconduct, computing
identifiers via social media handles. Second, to compute deterministic
identifiers for blockchain wallets. That's MetaMask, Taceo and human.world. Here
they actually go a bit further in what they use the OPRF for. So what does
MPC-friendliness mean for OPRFs? 

First of all, it means that the OPRF is a threshold function. This removes the
collusion assumption between a server and a client- maybe the client controlls a
part of the network. So we need a threshold OPRF where at least $m$ servers
participate, and then we assume that at least some of them are correct. Also,
they use something they call public verifiability, and this is where it is
important to draw a line between publicly verifiable OPRFs and blind signatures,
because not only do we have pseudorandomness, which is a weaker assumption than
one-more unforgeability (todo verify, at least pseudorand. implies
unforgeability but not vice versa). The nice thing is that generic ZKPs are
used, so we can prove more things. For example, I could not only prove I have a
token from the Austrian government that confirms I am a passport holder, but
maybe they also added a proof that my age is above 18. And what we also can do
with threshold OPRFs is that we can make them recursive verification friendly.
This means the client only has to verify a single proof, regardless of the
threshold that is set. 

So this is neat; but usually ZK is expensive, right? In the concrete
instantiatino, we can argue for using zk-friendly primitives. That usually means
primitives which few constraints in zero-knowledge. Proving systems like R1CS
need one constraint per multiplication gate, but can perform additions for free.
So we want to use a curve and a hash-to-curve function that is cheap in
zero-knowledge. It turns out that BabyJubJub is a good candidate because its
base field is the same as the scalar field of the proof system. In contrast,
e.g. the NIST-standardized  P-curves are not ZK friendly. 

Let's zoom in on the recursive verification: here, one proof is generated per
server, which is accumulated. Overall, this means we need two challenge/response
interactions, but that is fine if the verification is more efficient. 

Here is a concrete breakdown of how expensive each operation is in R1CS. So just
over 20 thousand constraints- that is very promising, especially since we take
less bandwidth than OPRFs. 

So let's go back to OPRFs. We've seen a lot of protocols. 2HashDh may look like
it is set in stone, but the PQ alternatives perform significantly worse. Maybe a
PQ solution comes from MPC, and if it does, augmenting the protocols with
additional proofs may be a cool functionality extension. In any case, MPC with
ZK gives an efficient OPRF given that zk-friendly curves are used alongside
zk-friendly hash functions. If you keep at that, you get constant verificaiton
cost for the client!

